When you bring your algorithm to the FDA,
your intended use statement will tie directly to these risk categories.
Let's take a non-algorithm example first.
This is a classic example right off of
the FDA's website that's used by many experts in the industry.
Let's say you developed a new scalpel,
but there's nothing special about it.
It's just a run-of-the-mill reusable surgical scalpel.
If you were to label it with the general labels of
being intended to use to cut through tissue,
this would actually be a Class 1 device and would be exempt from the FDA process.
All it needs is labeling around its hazards and some guidelines for using it.
But since it's not labeled as some things supporting, or sustaining life,
or of substantial importance in preventing impairment to human health,
it can be considered Class 1.
Now, imagine you took that exact same scalpel and label
it as being intended for use in optimal logic settings and eye surgery.
Then it immediately becomes a Class 3 device since that usually
sustains or supports life and presents potential unreasonable risk of illness or injury.
Seems confusing, doesn't it?
How can one device have two very different risk categories?
Also, why would someone manufacturing the scalpel use this example of intended use,
knowing that it would send them down a much more difficult regulatory path?
There are lots of these types of nuances with
the regulatory process and we could spend an entire course discussing them.
What's important for you to know is that how you say
your device or for you algorithm is intended to be used,
is critically important when dealing with the FDA.
Let's talk about an example more
directly tied to what we've learned in this course so far.
Suppose we developed a CNN that could classify
whether or not a screening mammogram has a malignant tumor in it.
If we stated it's intended use was for
the identification of breast cancer from mammography,
what class do you think it would be?
Let's think about risk.
Class 3 risk states that a device would fall into this category if it
presents a potential unreasonable risk of illness or injury.
Do you think this is the case?
Ask yourself this, what would happen if your algorithm missed a diagnosis of cancer?
The patient could die because they didn't start treatment.
So given this, your device would likely be labeled as Class 3.
The next question you might ask yourself is,
is there already a device on the market that does this that the FDA has approved?
In other words, a predicate device?
If the FDA has already approved a device that has the same intended use
as yours and you can demonstrate that your device is substantially equivalent,
then you may be able to go down the 510(k) regulatory path,
which is far less burdensome.
If, however, you are unable to identify a predicate device on the market,
your algorithm would have to seek pre-market approval or a PMA,
which is far more burdensome and takes a lot longer.
You may be surprised to know that in 2020,
there is no such predicate device that exist on the market.
So you would have to take the PMA route with an algorithm like this.
Now, let's change our intended use statement.
We'll instead say that our algorithm is intended to assist
the radiologist in the detection of breast abnormalities on mammogram.
The key words here are assisting the radiologist.
In this case, it states that the burden of diagnosis
is still on the radiologist at the end of the day,
and that your algorithm is merely assisting their diagnosis.
Perhaps this is by creating a bounding box
around the suspicious areas to draw their eye to them,
which may reduce the amount of time that they need to
spend reading a study to find an abnormality.
This is something that's referred to in the industry as
Computer-Assisted Diagnosis or CADx.
If we go back to the Class 3 risk statement,
do we still think that this is true?
If your algorithm puts the patient at any additional risk of injury,
it is, but I don't think that's the case here.
Of course, there's always the risk that the radiologists could be wrong,
but that's a risk that already exists in
the current medical imaging setting and is not due to your algorithm.
So we can say it's probably not true.
But now what? Is it Class 1,
or is it Class 2?
In theory, the radiologist is doing nothing different than they normally do.
So this would be low-risk, right?
Actually wrong.
The FDA assumes that with technologies like this,
the radiologists will probably end up relying on
the software even though it's not labeled that way.
In that case, they could end up relying on
the software too much and miss a suspicious binding,
because the algorithm didn't think that there was one.
So historically, CADx devices had been considered Class 3 by the FDA.
However, with the boom of AI in medical imaging,
the FDA has started to change their tune over the past couple of years,
and has started to classify a CADx devices as Class 2.
But this still means that without a predicate device,
your algorithm would have to go down the PMA pathway.